---
layout: default
title: Pdfcraft 0.0.1
---

{{ page.title }}
----------------

I have a little Rails application that generates PDFs using Prawn. When I set
out to write the code, I went looking for a renderer/template handler plugin
that would let me construct PDFs using templates and partials. All I found was
Prawnto, which appeared to be a bit... abandoned.

I thought about forking Prawnto or writing my own plugin, but I hadn't written
a plugin for Rails since the 2.3-ish, and I had no interest in subjecting
myself to that again. Rather then writing my own Rails renderer, I decided I
would just write my PDF rendering code as some well factored POROs, and that's
I went live with.

Over the holidays, I finally caught up on my reading which included [*Crafting
Rails 4 Applications*](http://pragprog.com/book/jvrails2/crafting-rails-4-applications)
by José Valim. In that book he demonstrates how easy it is to add your own
custom renderers and template handlers to a Rails application.

Starting with the code from the book, I was able to build a small plugin that could
completely replace my PORO rendering in about a day.  I spent the next morning
incorporating the template rendering into my application, and then I pushed it
to production on the first (Happy New Year!). That small plugin is PDFCraft,
and I'm [sharing it with you](https://github.com/kofno/pdfcraft).

### Examples

Really quickly, lets look at some example templates.

This is an exmple of a simple, single file template. The engine underlying
Pdfcraft is Prawn, so that's the API we use when constructing a document:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/kofno/8231456.js">&nbsp;</script>

You'll notice the reference to the PDF document is stored in the @pdf ivar.
This works for our purposes, but I don't especially like it. It will probably
change in a future release.

Since Pdfcraft just plugs in to the Rails teamplate handling, you can also use
partials.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/kofno/8231503.js">&nbsp;</script>

The @pdf ivar isn't exactly a Prawn::Document. Its a Pdfcraft document that
delegates to the Prawn::Document. This is so we can extend the API. For
example, here's a template that renders in landscape.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/kofno/8231522.js">&nbsp;</script>

By not depending explicitly on Prawn we leave the door open to use alternative
PDF rendering engines. It would be spectacular to have a Streaming PDF renderer
as an alternative engine. I haven't found one yet, though.

### Layouts, #render_to_string, and Other Gotchas

Layouts should work just fine. In fact, I built a layout with a #yield call,
and all the content was rendered, but it overlapped. I think this is because
layout templates are compiled at a different time then the other templates.
I'll need to do some more research.

The contract for #render_to_string declares that you must always return a
string. However, PDFs are a binary format, and so a string represenation
doesn't make sense. Furthermre, Rails doesn't have a #render_to_binary method.
Due to these factors, I just leave #render_to_string returning the binary PDF
data. If you want to cache your PDF content (to S3, for example), this is how
you would get the data as a stream.

Finally. this is an early release of this gem. As noted, there might be some
rough edges or unexpected behavior. If you try it out and find problems, feel
free to report an [issue](https://github.com/kofno/pdfcraft/issues).


